Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the organisation of the nervous system and synaptic transmission.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin neurophysiology. Outline the organisation of the nervous system.
The nervous system is organised, both anatomically and functionally,
into divisions that together sense the internal and external environment,
integrate that information, and direct the responses of the body.
Anatomically, it is divided into the central nervous system — the brain and the
spinal cord — which is the site of integration;
and the peripheral nervous system — the nerves connecting the centre to the body —
which carries information in and commands out.
Functionally, the peripheral system has a sensory, or afferent,
division carrying information to the centre, and a motor, or efferent,
division carrying commands out; the motor division is further divided into the
somatic nervous system, controlling the voluntary skeletal muscle,
and the autonomic nervous system, controlling the involuntary functions of the
viscera, vessels and glands, itself divided into sympathetic and parasympathetic.
The functional unit is the neuron, supported by the glial cells.
The central nervous system is organised into grey matter,
containing the cell bodies and synapses, and white matter,
containing the myelinated tracts.
So the nervous system is divided into the central nervous system for integration
and the peripheral for connection; functionally into afferent sensory and efferent
motor divisions, the motor comprising the somatic and the autonomic systems;
built of neurons supported by glia,
and organised into grey and white matter — an organisation underlying its function
of sensing, integrating and responding.
Describe the structure and types of the neuron.
The neuron is the functional signalling unit of the nervous system,
specialised for the reception, integration and transmission of electrical signals,
and its structure reflects these functions.
A typical neuron has a cell body, the soma,
containing the nucleus and the metabolic machinery; dendrites,
branching processes that receive synaptic inputs and conduct them towards the soma;
and a single axon, which conducts the output — the action potential — away from the
soma to its terminals, where it synapses on other cells.
The axon may be myelinated, by sheaths that speed conduction,
with nodes between them, or unmyelinated. The terminals release neurotransmitter
onto the next cell.
Neurons are classified by their structure — by the number of processes,
as multipolar, bipolar or unipolar — and by their function — as sensory, afferent,
neurons carrying information in; motor, efferent, neurons carrying commands out;
and interneurons, the most numerous,
connecting neurons within the central nervous system and performing its integration.
So the neuron has a soma with the metabolic machinery, dendrites receiving inputs,
and a single axon — myelinated or not — conducting the output to its synaptic
terminals; classified structurally by their processes and functionally as sensory,
motor and interneurons — a structure specialised for receiving,
integrating and transmitting signals.
Describe the glial cells and their functions.
The glial cells, or neuroglia, are the non-neuronal cells of the nervous system,
far outnumbering the neurons, and they are not merely supportive but perform
essential functions for the neurons and the nervous system,
increasingly recognised as active participants.
There are several types.
The astrocytes, star-shaped cells of the central nervous system, have many roles:
they support the neurons structurally and metabolically,
regulate the composition of the extracellular fluid and the concentration of ions
and neurotransmitters, contribute to the blood-brain barrier, and respond to injury.
The oligodendrocytes form the myelin sheaths of the central nervous system,
each myelinating several axons; their peripheral counterpart is the Schwann cell,
which myelinates the peripheral axons.
The microglia are the resident immune cells of the central nervous system,
performing immune surveillance and responding to injury and infection.
The ependymal cells line the ventricles and are involved in the production and
circulation of the cerebrospinal fluid.
So the glial cells comprise the astrocytes — supporting neurons,
regulating the extracellular environment and forming the blood-brain barrier;
the oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells — myelinating the central and peripheral
axons; the microglia — the immune cells;
and the ependymal cells — lining the ventricles and handling the cerebrospinal
fluid; essential active partners to the neurons, not merely passive support.
Describe synaptic transmission at a chemical synapse in the central nervous system.
Chemical synaptic transmission is the principal means by which neurons communicate,
and the chemical synapse, by interposing a neurotransmitter between the cells,
allows the signalling to be modulated,
integrated and made excitatory or inhibitory — the basis of the integrative
function of the nervous system.
At a chemical synapse, the presynaptic terminal is separated from the postsynaptic
cell by the synaptic cleft.
When the action potential reaches the terminal, it depolarises it,
opening voltage-gated calcium channels;
the entry of calcium triggers the fusion of synaptic vesicles with the membrane and
the release of their neurotransmitter into the cleft.
The transmitter diffuses across and binds to receptors on the postsynaptic
membrane, causing a change in its permeability and so a postsynaptic potential —
depolarising and excitatory, or hyperpolarising and inhibitory,
according to the transmitter and receptor.
The transmitter is then removed, by reuptake, enzymatic breakdown or diffusion,
terminating the signal.
So at a central chemical synapse, the arriving action potential admits calcium into
the terminal, triggering the release of neurotransmitter,
which crosses the cleft and binds postsynaptic receptors to produce an excitatory
or inhibitory postsynaptic potential, before being removed — a transmission that,
through the interposed transmitter,
allows the modulation and integration that the nervous system requires.
Describe excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials and synaptic integration.
A central neuron receives thousands of synaptic inputs,
some excitatory and some inhibitory,
and it integrates them to decide whether to fire,
this integration being the elementary computation of the nervous system,
performed at the level of the single neuron.
Each synaptic input produces a graded postsynaptic potential.
An excitatory postsynaptic potential is a depolarisation,
produced typically by the opening of channels permeable to sodium,
bringing the membrane towards threshold.
An inhibitory postsynaptic potential is a hyperpolarisation, or a stabilisation,
produced typically by the opening of channels permeable to chloride or potassium,
moving the membrane away from threshold.
These graded potentials are summed: spatially,
the inputs from many synapses combining; and temporally,
successive inputs from one synapse adding if they arrive close in time.
The neuron integrates the sum of its excitatory and inhibitory inputs;
if the net depolarisation at the axon hillock reaches threshold,
an action potential is generated and propagated; if not, none is.
So the neuron integrates its many inputs through excitatory postsynaptic potentials
— depolarising, towards threshold — and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials —
hyperpolarising, away from it — summed spatially and temporally,
firing an action potential only if the net depolarisation at the axon hillock
reaches threshold; the integration of excitation and inhibition being the
fundamental computation of the nervous system.
Describe the principal neurotransmitters of the central nervous system.
The central nervous system uses a range of neurotransmitters,
and knowing the principal ones, and whether they are excitatory or inhibitory,
is important, both for understanding its function and because many drugs,
including anaesthetic agents, act on these systems.
The principal fast excitatory transmitter is glutamate,
which acts on receptors to depolarise the postsynaptic cell,
and is used by most excitatory synapses.
The principal fast inhibitory transmitters are gamma-aminobutyric acid, or GABA,
used throughout the brain, and glycine, used in the spinal cord and brainstem;
both hyperpolarise the cell, chiefly by opening chloride channels.
Acetylcholine is used in various central pathways,
as well as at the neuromuscular junction and in the autonomic system.
The monoamines — noradrenaline, dopamine,
and serotonin — are used by modulatory systems projecting widely through the brain,
influencing arousal, mood and movement. Many neuropeptides act as transmitters and
modulators.
So the central nervous system uses glutamate as the principal excitatory
transmitter; GABA and glycine as the principal inhibitory transmitters,
opening chloride channels; acetylcholine in central,
neuromuscular and autonomic transmission; and the monoamines — noradrenaline,
dopamine and serotonin — in the modulatory systems of arousal, mood and movement;
transmitter systems central to the function of the brain and the action of many
drugs.
Distinguish ionotropic and metabotropic receptors.
Neurotransmitter receptors fall into two great families — the ionotropic and the
metabotropic — which differ fundamentally in their mechanism and so in the speed
and nature of their effects, a distinction important for understanding synaptic
transmission and drug action.
The ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels:
the receptor is itself an ion channel, which opens when the transmitter binds,
allowing ions to flow and so producing a postsynaptic potential directly and
rapidly, within milliseconds.
They mediate fast synaptic transmission — the glutamate,
GABA-A and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are examples.
The metabotropic receptors are not channels but are coupled, through G-proteins,
to intracellular signalling systems: when the transmitter binds,
the receptor activates a G-protein,
which in turn activates enzymes and second messengers,
or modulates channels indirectly; their effects are slower,
beginning over a longer time and lasting longer,
and they often modulate the cell's excitability and responses rather than producing
a fast potential.
The muscarinic acetylcholine, the metabotropic glutamate,
and the monoamine and many peptide receptors are examples.
So the ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels mediating fast,
direct synaptic transmission, while the metabotropic receptors act through
G-proteins and second messengers to produce slower, longer and modulatory effects;
a distinction determining the speed and nature of the response,
and important to the action of transmitters and drugs.
Describe the NMDA receptor and its relevance to anaesthesia.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, or NMDA receptor,
is a particular glutamate receptor with distinctive properties,
and it is of special interest in anaesthesia because it is the target of several
anaesthetic and analgesic agents and is implicated in pain and in neuronal injury.
It is an ionotropic glutamate receptor, a ligand-gated ion channel,
but with unusual features. It is permeable to calcium, as well as to other ions,
so its activation admits calcium, a signalling and potentially toxic ion.
It requires, for its activation, both the binding of glutamate and a depolarisation
of the membrane, because at the resting potential the channel is blocked by a
magnesium ion, which is expelled only when the cell is depolarised;
so it acts as a coincidence detector,
opening only when glutamate is present and the cell is already depolarised.
This gives it a role in the synaptic plasticity underlying learning and memory,
in the central sensitisation and wind-up of pain, and,
through excessive calcium entry, in excitotoxic neuronal injury.
It is blocked by ketamine, nitrous oxide and xenon,
which produce anaesthesia and analgesia partly by this action.
So the NMDA receptor is a calcium-permeable ionotropic glutamate receptor,
blocked at rest by magnesium and so acting as a coincidence detector requiring both
glutamate and depolarisation; involved in synaptic plasticity,
in the central sensitisation of pain, and in excitotoxic injury;
and blocked by ketamine, nitrous oxide and xenon — a receptor of particular
relevance to anaesthesia and analgesia.
Pull it together: how does the organisation of the nervous system support its
integrative function?
I would draw it together around the nervous system as an organisation built to
sense, integrate and respond, from the level of the single synapse up to the
divisions of the whole system.
At the cellular level, the neuron receives many inputs on its dendrites and soma,
integrates them — summing excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials
spatially and temporally — and fires an action potential only if the net reaches
threshold; this integration, repeated at every neuron,
is the elementary computation.
The synapses, chemical and using a variety of transmitters acting on ionotropic and
metabotropic receptors, allow this integration to be excitatory or inhibitory,
fast or modulatory, and to be modified by experience and by drugs.
The neurons are organised, with their supporting glia,
into the grey matter of integration and the white matter of conduction,
and into the central nervous system for integration and the peripheral for
connection, with afferent and efferent, somatic and autonomic divisions.
So from the integration of inputs at the single neuron,
through the diversity of synaptic transmission,
to the organisation into central and peripheral, sensory and motor divisions,
the nervous system is built to sense the environment, integrate the information,
and direct the response — an organisation whose every level serves this integrative
function, and whose synapses are the targets of the drugs of anaesthesia.
Describe the events of neurotransmitter release at the presynaptic terminal.
The release of neurotransmitter is the critical step that converts the electrical
signal of the action potential into a chemical signal, and its mechanism,
triggered by calcium, is worth detailing,
since it is the point at which transmission can be modulated.
When the action potential invades the presynaptic terminal,
it depolarises the membrane, opening voltage-gated calcium channels in the
terminal; calcium flows in down its steep electrochemical gradient,
and the local rise in intracellular calcium is the trigger for release.
The transmitter is stored in synaptic vesicles,
clustered near specialised release sites, the active zones.
The rise in calcium causes vesicles to fuse with the presynaptic membrane and
release their contents into the cleft by exocytosis,
through the action of calcium on proteins that mediate the docking and fusion of
the vesicles.
The amount released depends steeply on the calcium entry,
so the release is graded with the depolarisation and can be modulated by anything
affecting the terminal calcium. The vesicle membrane is then recovered and recycled.
So neurotransmitter release is triggered when the action potential opens
voltage-gated calcium channels in the terminal,
and the entering calcium causes synaptic vesicles to fuse with the membrane and
release their transmitter by exocytosis at the active zones;
the release depending steeply on calcium entry,
so allowing modulation — the calcium-dependent step converting the electrical to
the chemical signal.
Describe how the action of a neurotransmitter is terminated.
For synaptic transmission to convey rapid, discrete signals,
the action of the neurotransmitter must be promptly terminated after its release,
and the mechanisms by which this is achieved are important,
since several are targets of drugs.
Once released and having acted on the postsynaptic receptors,
the transmitter must be cleared from the cleft. There are three main mechanisms.
The first, and for many transmitters the most important, is reuptake:
the transmitter is actively transported back into the presynaptic terminal,
or into glial cells, by specific transporters — as for the monoamines and for
glutamate and GABA; these transporters are the targets of drugs such as the
antidepressants, which block monoamine reuptake.
The second is enzymatic degradation: the transmitter is broken down in the cleft,
the prime example being acetylcholine,
hydrolysed by acetylcholinesterase — the target of the anticholinesterases.
The third is simple diffusion away from the cleft.
The transmitter taken up is often recycled.
So the action of a neurotransmitter is terminated by reuptake into the terminal or
glia by specific transporters — the target of the antidepressants;
by enzymatic degradation, as of acetylcholine by acetylcholinesterase — the target
of the anticholinesterases; and by diffusion; mechanisms that ensure rapid,
discrete signalling and that are important targets of drugs.
Describe the GABA-A receptor and its importance in anaesthesia.
The GABA-A receptor is the principal mediator of fast inhibition in the brain,
and it is of central importance in anaesthesia because it is the main molecular
target of a large number of anaesthetic and sedative agents,
so its properties are worth detailing.
The GABA-A receptor is an ionotropic receptor, a ligand-gated ion channel,
activated by the inhibitory transmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid; when GABA binds,
the channel opens and admits chloride ions, which hyperpolarise the cell,
or stabilise it, inhibiting it — the basis of fast synaptic inhibition.
Crucially, the receptor has, besides the GABA-binding site,
several other sites at which drugs can bind and modulate its function,
generally by enhancing the effect of GABA.
Many anaesthetic and sedative agents act here:
the benzodiazepines bind a specific site and increase the response to GABA;
the intravenous agents propofol and the barbiturates enhance and, at higher doses,
directly activate the receptor; the volatile inhalational agents also potentiate
it; and so do etomidate and others.
By enhancing this inhibition, these agents depress neuronal excitability,
producing sedation, hypnosis and anaesthesia.
So the GABA-A receptor is a ligand-gated chloride channel mediating fast
inhibition; it has modulatory sites at which the benzodiazepines, propofol,
the barbiturates, the volatile agents and etomidate act to enhance the inhibitory
effect of GABA, depressing neuronal excitability — the principal molecular target
of much of anaesthesia, of central importance to the subject.
Describe the glutamate receptor subtypes.
Glutamate, the principal excitatory transmitter, acts on several receptor subtypes,
both ionotropic and metabotropic, and distinguishing them is useful,
since they have different roles and some are anaesthetic targets.
The ionotropic glutamate receptors,
the ligand-gated channels mediating fast excitation, are of three types,
named after their selective agonists. The AMPA receptors mediate the fast component
of most excitatory transmission, admitting sodium to depolarise the cell rapidly.
The kainate receptors have a similar, modulatory role.
The NMDA receptors, as discussed, are distinctive: calcium-permeable,
blocked at rest by magnesium so requiring both glutamate and depolarisation,
and involved in plasticity, sensitisation and excitotoxicity,
and blocked by ketamine, nitrous oxide and xenon.
The metabotropic glutamate receptors, by contrast, are G-protein-coupled,
producing slower, modulatory effects on excitability rather than fast transmission.
So most fast excitatory transmission is mediated by the AMPA receptors,
with the kainate receptors contributing;
the NMDA receptors add a calcium-permeable,
coincidence-detecting component important in plasticity and sensitisation and
targeted by ketamine and nitrous oxide;
and the metabotropic glutamate receptors give slower modulation — a family of
receptors mediating excitation, of which the NMDA subtype is of particular
anaesthetic interest.
Describe synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation.
Synaptic plasticity — the capacity of synapses to change their strength with use —
is a fundamental property of the nervous system, underlying learning and memory,
and long-term potentiation is its best-studied example,
of interest also because its mechanisms overlap with those of pain sensitisation.
Synaptic plasticity is the ability of the strength of synaptic transmission to be
modified by activity, so that synapses are strengthened or weakened according to
their use — the cellular basis of learning and memory and of the adaptability of
the nervous system.
Long-term potentiation is a long-lasting increase in synaptic strength following a
period of high-frequency stimulation; it is prominent in the hippocampus,
a structure important for memory.
Its mechanism depends importantly on the NMDA receptor:
the strong activity depolarises the postsynaptic cell,
relieving the magnesium block of the NMDA receptors, which then admit calcium;
the rise in calcium triggers changes that strengthen the synapse,
including the insertion of more AMPA receptors.
The same NMDA-dependent mechanisms underlie the central sensitisation and wind-up
of pain.
So synaptic plasticity is the use-dependent modification of synaptic strength
underlying learning and memory; long-term potentiation, its prototype,
is a lasting strengthening after high-frequency stimulation,
depending on the NMDA receptor admitting calcium when the cell is depolarised,
which strengthens the synapse — mechanisms shared with the central sensitisation of
pain, linking memory and chronic pain.
Describe electrical synapses and gap junctions.
Besides the chemical synapses that dominate the nervous system,
there are electrical synapses, which transmit signals directly and have distinctive
properties and roles, worth knowing as a contrast to chemical transmission.
An electrical synapse is a direct, low-resistance connection between two cells,
formed by a gap junction — a channel that directly connects the cytoplasm of the
two cells, allowing ions and small molecules, and so electrical current,
to pass directly from one to the other.
Transmission across an electrical synapse differs from chemical transmission:
it is very fast, essentially instantaneous, with no synaptic delay;
it is usually bidirectional; and it tends to synchronise the activity of the
connected cells, since they are electrically coupled.
It cannot, however, easily invert a signal — make an excitatory input inhibitory —
or amplify or integrate in the way a chemical synapse can.
Electrical synapses are found where speed and synchrony are needed,
and are more common in some other tissues, such as cardiac and smooth muscle,
where gap junctions allow the spread of excitation.
So an electrical synapse is a direct cytoplasmic connection through a gap junction,
allowing current to pass directly between cells; transmission being very fast,
bidirectional and synchronising, but without the modulation,
inversion and integration of chemical synapses;
found where speed and synchrony are needed and prominent in cardiac and smooth
muscle — a contrasting mode of transmission.
Describe the modulatory monoaminergic and cholinergic systems of the brain.
Besides the fast point-to-point transmission of glutamate and GABA,
the brain contains diffuse modulatory systems,
using the monoamines and acetylcholine,
which project widely and regulate the overall state of the brain — arousal, mood,
attention — and which are important targets of drugs, including in anaesthesia.
These systems share a plan: a relatively small group of neurons,
in the brainstem or basal forebrain,
projects widely and diffusely throughout the brain,
releasing a modulatory transmitter that adjusts the excitability and responsiveness
of large areas, rather than carrying specific information.
The noradrenergic system, from the locus coeruleus in the pons,
projects widely and is concerned with arousal, attention and vigilance;
it is a target of the alpha-two agonists used in anaesthesia,
such as dexmedetomidine, which reduce its activity to produce sedation.
The serotonergic system, from the raphe nuclei, modulates mood,
sleep and other functions. The dopaminergic systems are concerned with movement,
reward and other functions.
The cholinergic systems, from the basal forebrain and brainstem,
are important in arousal, attention and memory.
So the brain's modulatory systems — the noradrenergic from the locus coeruleus,
the serotonergic from the raphe, the dopaminergic,
and the cholinergic from the basal forebrain and brainstem — consist of small
neuron groups projecting widely to regulate arousal, mood, attention and movement;
targets of many drugs, including the alpha-two agonists used for sedation — the
diffuse modulatory control of the brain's state.
Describe the reticular formation and the ascending arousal system.
The state of consciousness and arousal depends on a system in the brainstem and its
projections — the reticular formation and the ascending arousal system — an
understanding of which is fundamental to the physiology of consciousness,
sleep and anaesthesia.
The reticular formation is a diffuse network of neurons in the core of the
brainstem, with many functions, including the control of arousal.
The ascending arousal system, historically called the ascending reticular
activating system, arises from the reticular formation and related brainstem nuclei
— including the monoaminergic and cholinergic groups — and projects upward,
through the thalamus and directly, to activate the cerebral cortex widely,
maintaining the waking, conscious, aroused state.
Activity in this system maintains wakefulness;
its reduction produces drowsiness and sleep; and its damage,
as by brainstem injury, causes coma. Sleep involves a regulated reduction in the
activity of this arousal system, with the active promotion of sleep by other
centres.
General anaesthesia is thought to act in part by suppressing this arousal system
and its thalamocortical projections, contributing to the loss of consciousness.
So the reticular formation in the brainstem core gives rise to the ascending
arousal system, which, through the thalamus and directly,
activates the cortex to maintain wakefulness and consciousness;
its reduction causing sleep and its damage coma,
and its suppression contributing to the loss of consciousness in anaesthesia — the
system underlying arousal and consciousness.
Describe presynaptic inhibition and the modulation of transmitter release.
The release of transmitter at a synapse is not fixed but can be modulated,
and presynaptic inhibition is an important example,
by which the output of a synapse is controlled at its source,
adding to the computational richness of the nervous system.
Presynaptic modulation acts on the presynaptic terminal to alter the amount of
transmitter it releases, rather than acting on the postsynaptic cell.
Presynaptic inhibition reduces the transmitter released:
it is often mediated by another neuron synapsing on the terminal — an axo-axonic
synapse — releasing a transmitter, such as GABA,
that reduces the calcium entry into the terminal when the action potential arrives,
so reducing the release; this selectively inhibits the input from that particular
terminal, without affecting the postsynaptic cell's other inputs.
Presynaptic facilitation conversely increases release.
Many transmitters and drugs act presynaptically through receptors on the terminal —
including autoreceptors, by which a transmitter inhibits its own further release.
This presynaptic control is important in the spinal cord,
including in the modulation of sensory and pain transmission,
and is a site of drug action.
So presynaptic inhibition reduces the transmitter released from a terminal,
often by an axo-axonic synapse reducing the terminal calcium entry,
selectively inhibiting that input without affecting the postsynaptic cell;
with presynaptic facilitation the converse,
and autoreceptors providing feedback — a presynaptic control of synaptic strength
important in sensory and pain processing and a site of drug action.
Describe the regulation of the extracellular environment by glia,
including potassium buffering.
The neurons can only function in a closely-controlled extracellular environment,
and the glial cells, particularly the astrocytes,
play an essential part in maintaining it,
a role that illustrates their active contribution to nervous function.
The activity of neurons tends to disturb the composition of the small extracellular
space: each action potential releases potassium,
and synaptic transmission releases transmitters such as glutamate,
which would accumulate and disturb function if not controlled.
The astrocytes maintain the environment in several ways.
They buffer the extracellular potassium:
by taking up the potassium released by active neurons and redistributing it,
they prevent the rise in extracellular potassium that would otherwise depolarise
and disturb the neurons — potassium spatial buffering.
They take up neurotransmitters, particularly glutamate, by specific transporters,
clearing it from the synapse — both terminating its action and preventing its
accumulation to excitotoxic levels.
They regulate the extracellular pH and volume,
and supply metabolic substrates to the neurons.
They also contribute to the blood-brain barrier.
So the astrocytes maintain the neurons' extracellular environment by buffering the
potassium released by activity, taking up neurotransmitters such as glutamate to
terminate their action and prevent excitotoxicity, regulating the pH and volume,
and supplying metabolic support — an active and essential contribution to nervous
function, beyond mere structural support.
Describe excitotoxicity.
Excitotoxicity is the process by which excessive activation of glutamate receptors
damages and kills neurons, and it is an important mechanism of neuronal injury in
ischaemia and other conditions, of relevance to the protection of the brain.
The concept is that glutamate, although the normal excitatory transmitter,
becomes toxic when present in excess or acting excessively.
This occurs notably in cerebral ischaemia: when the blood flow fails,
the energy-dependent processes fail, neurons depolarise,
and large amounts of glutamate are released and not cleared,
because the uptake transporters also fail;
the excess glutamate over-activates its receptors,
particularly the calcium-permeable NMDA receptors,
causing a large and sustained entry of calcium into the neurons.
This calcium overload triggers a cascade of damaging processes — activating
destructive enzymes, generating free radicals,
and impairing the mitochondria — which damage and kill the neuron.
Excitotoxicity thus contributes to the neuronal death in stroke, head injury,
and other insults, and it is a target of attempts at neuroprotection,
including NMDA antagonists, though these have been difficult to translate
clinically.
So excitotoxicity is the damage and death of neurons from excessive
glutamate-receptor activation, prominent in ischaemia,
where failed energy and uptake allow glutamate to accumulate and over-activate the
calcium-permeable NMDA receptors, causing a calcium overload that triggers
destructive processes; a mechanism of neuronal injury in stroke and head injury,
and a target of neuroprotection.
Describe the response of peripheral nerve to injury and the principles of
regeneration.
The response of nerves to injury, and their capacity for regeneration,
differ between the peripheral and the central nervous system,
a difference of clinical importance and of interest,
relevant to nerve injury and recovery.
When a peripheral axon is severed, the part distal to the injury,
cut off from the cell body, degenerates — Wallerian degeneration — the axon and its
myelin breaking down and being cleared.
The peripheral nervous system, however,
has a considerable capacity for regeneration:
the cell body survives if not too close to the injury,
and the axon can regrow from the proximal stump,
the Schwann cells and the surviving connective tissue framework guiding the
regrowing axon down the original path towards its target,
at a slow rate of around a millimetre a day;
if the regrowing axon reaches its target, function may be restored.
The success depends on the type of injury and the alignment of the stumps.
The central nervous system, by contrast, regenerates poorly:
the central axons do not regrow effectively,
owing to an inhibitory environment and the absence of the supportive guidance the
Schwann cells provide peripherally, so central injury tends to be permanent.
So a severed peripheral axon undergoes Wallerian degeneration distally,
but can regenerate from the proximal stump,
guided by the Schwann cells down the original path at about a millimetre a day,
restoring function if it reaches its target;
whereas the central nervous system regenerates poorly,
owing to an inhibitory environment,
so central injury tends to be permanent — a difference of importance in nerve
injury and its recovery.
Describe the concepts of convergence,
divergence and the integrative function of neuronal circuits.
The power of the nervous system to process information arises not only from the
integration at single neurons but from the way neurons are connected into circuits,
and the principles of convergence and divergence are basic to understanding this,
underlying the system's integrative function.
Convergence is the arrangement by which a single neuron receives inputs from many
other neurons, which converge upon it;
this allows the neuron to integrate information from many sources — the basis of
the summation of excitatory and inhibitory inputs to decide whether to fire,
and of the combining of different kinds of information.
Divergence is the arrangement by which a single neuron,
through the branching of its axon, distributes its output to many other neurons;
this allows a signal to be spread and amplified,
and to influence many targets and pathways.
Most neurons show both, receiving from many and projecting to many.
These arrangements, with excitatory and inhibitory connections,
allow neuronal circuits to perform operations — amplifying, filtering, gating,
and generating patterns of activity — the building blocks of the integrative
function. Feedback and feedforward connections add control.
So convergence — many inputs onto one neuron — allows the integration of
information and the summation of inputs,
while divergence — one neuron's output to many — allows the spread and
amplification of signals; together, with excitation and inhibition and feedback,
building the neuronal circuits that perform the integrative operations of the
nervous system.
Describe co-transmission and Dale's principle.
The classical view that each neuron releases a single transmitter has been revised
by the recognition of co-transmission, and considering this, with Dale's principle,
gives a more accurate picture of synaptic signalling,
relevant to the complexity of neuromodulation.
Dale's principle, in its original form,
held that a neuron releases the same transmitter or transmitters at all its
terminals — a useful principle of the chemical consistency of a neuron,
often summarised, less accurately, as one neuron releasing one transmitter.
It is now known that many neurons release more than one transmitter —
co-transmission: typically a classical fast transmitter, such as glutamate,
GABA or acetylcholine, together with one or more neuropeptides,
or sometimes another small-molecule transmitter,
stored often in different vesicles and released differentially according to the
pattern of activity.
The co-released substances have complementary effects — the fast transmitter
mediating rapid transmission and the peptide a slower modulation — broadening the
signalling possibilities of the synapse.
An example is the co-release of substance P with glutamate by nociceptive afferents.
So Dale's principle holds that a neuron uses the same transmitters at all its
terminals; but co-transmission — the release of more than one transmitter,
typically a fast transmitter with a modulatory neuropeptide,
released differentially with activity — is now recognised as common,
broadening synaptic signalling; an example being substance P with glutamate in
nociception — a more accurate and richer picture of synaptic transmission.
Thank you. A clear opening account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The nervous system divides anatomically into the central (brain + spinal
cord, for integration) and peripheral (connection);
functionally into afferent sensory and efferent motor divisions,
the motor comprising the somatic (voluntary skeletal muscle) and autonomic
(involuntary; sympathetic + parasympathetic) systems.
The functional unit is the neuron (soma, dendrites receiving inputs,
a single output axon ± myelin), supported by glia,
organised into grey matter (cell bodies/synapses) and white matter (tracts).
Second, Glia: astrocytes (support, regulate the extracellular environment,
form the blood-brain barrier), oligodendrocytes/Schwann cells (central/peripheral
myelin), microglia (immune cells), ependymal cells (line ventricles,
CSF) — active partners, not passive support.
Third, Central chemical synapse: the action potential admits Ca2+ into the terminal
→ vesicle fusion and transmitter release → binds postsynaptic receptors →
excitatory (depolarising, EPSP) or inhibitory (hyperpolarising,
IPSP) postsynaptic potential → transmitter removed.
The neuron sums EPSPs/IPSPs (spatial + temporal) and fires only if the axon hillock
reaches threshold — the fundamental neural computation. 4.
Principal CNS transmitters: glutamate (main fast excitatory);
GABA and glycine (main fast inhibitory, opening Cl- channels);
acetylcholine (central, NMJ, autonomic); monoamines (noradrenaline, dopamine,
serotonin — modulatory arousal/mood/movement).
Receptors: ionotropic (ligand-gated channels — fast,
direct) vs metabotropic (G-protein-coupled — slower, modulatory).
Fourth, The NMDA receptor: a calcium-permeable ionotropic glutamate receptor,
blocked at rest by Mg2+ so it needs BOTH glutamate and depolarisation (a
coincidence detector); involved in synaptic plasticity,
the central sensitisation/wind-up of pain, and excitotoxic injury;
blocked by ketamine, nitrous oxide and xenon — a key anaesthetic/analgesic target.
Thank you. That concludes the station.